.
My name is Elvira Prieto. I'm a sophomore
in human biology here. I'm from Reedley,
California, which is a small agricultural
town in the San Joaquin Valley. My parents
are migrant workers, and I've worked in
the fields with them all my life, up until
I started coming to school. My name is Eva
Silva. I'm a senior majoring in human
biology with an emphasis on education in
the diverse classroom. And I'm from
Salinas, California, and I'm going to be a
math teacher. My name is Tamara Alvarado
and I'm majoring in Spanish Chicano
Studies. I'm from a town in San Diego
called Escondido and what else? That's it
for now. My name is Julia Gonzalez Luna. I
am a senior majoring in public policy with
a focus on on education. And I'm from
Burbank, California, and I'm going to be a
social studies high school teacher.
Do you want to ask some questions here as
to how this started? In your own words,
how did it start? How did this hunter
strike start and why? Why?
How did it start? Speak to us as if we
don't know. Okay. Speak to me like you do.
Well, I guess it was a buildup of a lot of
different things that have been happening,
not only on this campus, but overall in
this nation with the status of Chicanos
and Chicanas in the United States, in the
universities and everywhere else. So, you
know, I guess I can run down, like, since
my freshman year, so many things have
happened, the closing down of the Office
of Chicano Affairs, and then with all the
threats, with the budget cuts to the
ethnic centers, and just these attacks on
the theme houses, on the ethnic centers,
and everything else, and then the laying
off of Cecilia Burciaga. I mean everything
just like piled down piled down and so
many things are happening that we say wait
we need to do something about it and we
need to change what's going on because
nothing's happening that we want to happen
I'm tired, I'm sorry. No, you sound good.
Some people wonder why you would need to
take a drastic measure like this. I think
you'll say why didn't you? Because the
administration has been very, whenever
we've had like meetings and townhouse
meetings or whatever, get togethers with
any of the administrators, we don't get
any results that we're happy with. And so
it seemed to me like for them to really
understand how extreme the situation is on
this campus and how extreme things are
outside in terms of immigrant bashing and
just the way that people in Ispa Lo Alto
are, that it was maybe the only way that
they would, I don't know if it would touch
their heart or if they would just stop to
think about it or if we could get enough
bad press for this university so that they
could finally just really think about it.
Because otherwise they weren't paying
attention. It was just like everything had
to go business as usual and there seemed
to be this idea about hierarchy here that
it was from top down it was what they said
first and then if we could deal with that
if we as students could deal with what the
university wanted well then that was fine
and if we couldn't that's too bad because
they're at their position because you know
they earned it or whatever yeah because
meeting after meeting like you didn't get
anything concrete from meeting with them
every single time it was just okay I'll
give I'll give you a meeting from 6 to 7,
I'll give you a meeting from 5.30 to 6 or
whatever. We've tried their methods. We've
tried their methods of working things out.
And their methods are to draw things out
for as long as possible in order to not
give us things. At least, you know, they
may say differently, but that's what it
feels like. And it's ridiculous to have to
spend... I'm sorry I'm slow, but I'm a
little bit tired. It's ridiculous to spend
so much time just talking and talking
about things. And they're trying to tire
us out with just talking. So that's what
it had to come to. And when people are not
heard, and this happens in society at
large, when people are not heard, yeah, I
don't know if I want to say abnormal
behaviors, but behaviors that are not
normal are what happen. And yeah, this is
not normal. This is not normal behavior
for us to be not eating. But you know... I
really like to eat. Yeah, we like to eat.
And I emphasize, you know, why are
Chicanos in prison? Why are Chicanos in
poverty? That's not normal. That's not
normal for people. But because of society,
that's how we are. We've waited long
enough for this. I mean, I know the
administration is probably thinking, well,
you know, be patient and these changes
will happen. But we've been patient long
enough. And, you know, the Chicano Studies
major has been, was envisioned back in the
70s, even the 60s. And we've been waiting
since then. And it's about time that we
get recognized. You know, Chicanos are the
biggest, are coming to be a majority in
California. you know, maybe even in the
whole country after a while, but I mean
it's about time that our issues get
recognized and that other people just
realize that we're not going to go away.
And if they don't educate themselves about
us, then it's just going to be worse for
them. Julia, you co-authored a really
beautiful poem entitled Somos Mujeres.
What for you What do you think is the
significance of having four Chicanas
taking the Vanguard role in this movement,
which is really bigger than this campus?
For me, I mean... I don't know. We didn't
really realize it was four women until
somebody pointed it out to us. I mean, we
knew it was girls, but we didn't see it
like, you know, oh, there's no guys here,
and what's up with the guys? but I don't
know I mean we have a lot of supporters
that are male and maybe they didn't say
they're gonna go for the long run but
they've been you know there the whole time
everybody like has had has their roles and
it's like there's some people that are the
negotiators there's people that are
security over here there's like everybody
has a roles and you know we're not the the
most important because if it wasn't for
them then you know nobody would be
listening to us or whatever and there's
other people that have been fasting also
like Felipe sitting over there again he's
been fasting these three days with us as
well and like there's people that
committed to three days and others that do
one one day cycles to show their support
and solidarity it's true there are a lot
of males that are doing really important
stuff in terms of really trying you know
like with the rest of the women also
trying to take care of us and and trying
to watch out for this, and they're just
constantly looking out to see what we need
or what needs to be done for the whole
group. And so it's, I don't know, I don't
know that it's specifically a female thing
to be fasting or anything like that. Yeah,
because I think... Because everybody
really does have their own role, and
everybody's been really supportive, and
we're working together. It just so
happened that we're the ones that... It
was quite... that we're the ones that were
ready mentally at this time to fast. And
it just so happens that we're all women.
People are calling us guerrillas and
revolucionarias.
That's fine. That's nice. That's really
nice. But everybody's been revolutionary.
And it comes down to what your, I don't
want to say your talents, because I don't
think our talent is to be hungry, but
pretty much everybody is taking on the
role that is best suited for themselves.
There's Felipe. There's Felipe. You have
all the things that you could have done,
all the actions you could have taken. Why
fasting? Why did you choose to fast?
Well, it's obviously a really strong
statement. You know, it's something that,
it's uncompromising, and it's something
that shows just how serious we are about
these issues. They're issues that our
fathers, grandfathers, and people way
before us, and have fought for them. We
have a responsibility to those ancestors
of ours to make sure that those dreams
that they had, that vision they had is
fulfilled. We can't just, you know, it may
be 20 years, 20, 30, 20 years later from
the Chicano movement that people think is
dead, but it's not dead. We're here and
we're living and we're the Chicano
movement. And Chicana movement. Yeah.
Chicano, Chicana. Chicano movement.
Felipe, you just joined us, but actually
you've been with us throughout this whole
struggle from the beginning as it was
pointed out. Can you tell us a little bit
about yourself, where you're from, and
your reflection on this struggle? Sure. My
name is Felipe Barayan. I'm a freshman,
originally from Los Angeles, California.
This struggle, I think for me, it's
something that's very important because I
went to high school in Watts and a lot of
people know what Watts is like, 1965,
Watts Rebellion, the Ninety-Two Riots.
There I saw issues that the educational
system for high school students and
Chicano-Tatinos there wasn't addressing
the real issues. Once I came here, I got a
taste of it, I got a taste of Chicano
studies and I found out how crucial that
was. And I think that getting involved
with the struggle is important for me to
build the processes with which we learn to
deal with inner city to wipe out the
marginalization of our people.
In terms of your actions, a lot of people
are probably thinking that you came here
to study and that you should be in the
classroom, not protesting.
So you're making a decision because it is
a pretty tough university to be at and
there's a lot of demands and you're kind
of out there really taking a big chance.
How did you make that decision? See, I
guess, like, the main thing is, is, like,
I never, like, when I came here, I didn't
want to come and just study and go to
class and go back home, study, do my work,
and just concentrate on myself. While
there's people out there, there's students
in the high schools that are getting
pushed out of the schools, there's the
farm workers that are getting treated
badly, there's kids being born without
hands because of the pesticides that they
put on the grapes. I mean, I can't just
sit and concentrate on my own work and not
worry about what's going on because that's
my people, that's my parents, that's my
family, that's everybody. And I wouldn't
be able to live with myself without doing
anything about it. I wouldn't be able to
live with myself with just thinking about
myself and my career and getting straight
A's and doing my resumes and stuff like
that. I wouldn't be able to do that. I
mean both things can be done. And also
like I think that we're doing this so that
you know later generations of Stanford
Chicanos and Chicanas don't have to do it.
Today we had you know little Chicanitas
and Chicanitos from East Palo Alto come
out and from a group called Raices de
Mexico and they came out and they're you
know they they came and supported us. You
know, they're just little kids. I don't
know, they're probably like from 5 to like
12 maybe. And, you know, the reason we're
doing this now and sacrificing our
academic times or study hours or whatever,
so that they, when they come here, you
know, they can focus, you know, on doing
the things that they need to do instead of
having to struggle so much. I mean, I
think it's just like our parents, you
know. They struggle so that we don't have
to struggle. And we don't, I mean, we
don't... We're still struggling, but at a
different level. You know what I mean?
We're not, I mean, we don't have to worry,
once we get out of here, we're not going
to have to worry about where am I going to
get something to eat, like before. Or how
are we going to pay the bills. We're
probably going to have to, you know, we're
probably going to be able to pay even our
parents' bills. Hopefully, yeah. Yeah, I
think the teachers are going to teach us
how to eat. I think it also goes back to
the question about why did we choose a
hunger strike. It's kind of like, you
know, we know that our grades are going to
suffer from this and we're not going to
graduate with a great GPA, you know, as we
could have. And I mean, it's to show that,
I mean, we know that we're capable of
doing a work, but we feel so strongly
about this that we're willing to do a
little bit, you know, worse than everybody
else because our issues are so important.
I mean, I think, I don't know if the
administration sees that, but I don't know
if anybody sees that. But I mean, you
know, I know that I could be a nice
student, you know, but, you know, I choose
to better be like, to be a human being
first and to care more about my people
than about my grades. I was going to ask
you, related to the incident that happened
on Sunday at the Flix, at the film,
Notaries of Sholom, how do you feel, or
what steps can the university take to
educate the student community, even staff
and faculty, about the issue of ongoing
racism, the issue of why it's important to
have abandoned graves on this campus. How
do you think the university can take a
proactive role in educating the community?
I think if they really truly believe that
that isn't right, that the incident at
Flix isn't right, or that people should
know and should understand that the
pesticides and the harm that they're doing
to people is wrong, then they should take
it upon themselves to educate this
university. If they really feel
responsible for the education of their
students, if they really, if they believe
that that is an important issue, that
people's lives and people's health and the
reaction of some or a lot of students
finding that amusing, there's something
wrong with that. that there's something
wrong with the mentality or with the
ignorance level or something of the
students at this university. And they are
responsible because they're the
administrators, they're in charge of this
school. They're here to serve the
students, but they're also here to help
educate them. And there's, I mean, to me
that proved just a lot of ignorance. It
didn't surprise me, but it was very
offensive and it was very disrespectful.
And if they really, if they agree with
that at all, then it's their
responsibility to deal with it. I mean the
main things that were, you know, just to
bring up what we're striking about, we
have these issues that we have been
dealing with as a community for a long
time. And you know, one of them being a
campus ban on grapes, the development of a
Chicano studies program and the community
center in Hispano Alto. And you know,
these are things that we can talk about
specifically. And the offer for Cecilia
Bulciaga. And the offer for a high level
position for Cecilia Bulciaga, a high
level administrator here. Chicama
administrator. Why is it important for the
university to recognize recognize
Cecilia's contributions. Why Cecilia's
position, Cecilia's role included among
these other three? Well, basically because
it ties down to the whole approach that
we're taking that our education isn't
addressing the real issues. You know, the
issues being poverty, the joblessness,
homelessness, and the over-representation
we have in the jails, and just everything.
And she ties into that because Cecilia has
always worked for those issues. She was
working on the Boycott Grapes campaign.
And when she gets here, I mean, when she's
here, you get here. I mean, she's like a
role model. A role model. What is this? A
role mother. Oh, man, I'm getting tired.
Oh, no. Yeah, what we're talking about,
she's a role model and a role mother.
Mother figure. Mother figure. That's it.
No, I guess basically because she helps in
just keeping us here. Because it's hard to
survive in a campus like this when you
have people, like, Sunday nights at Flick
saying, Beaners, go home, or, you know,
saying stuff like that here at Stanford. I
mean, how are we supposed to survive in a
climate that doesn't even accept us, that
you have to justify your existence? And
you need people like Cecilia Burciaga and
like Francis that just help you out just
to make, like, especially the transition
from, like, your first year. I mean,
that's what helped me so much living in
Zapata my very first year is, you know, I
survived the whole year because I was
living there, I think. Because, I mean,
she helped out a lot, like, with my
parents and just everything. I mean, I
think, like, they're always caring for
you. She's an important contact for us. I
mean, there's so few of us here. And then
there's so few of our, you know, Chicano
and Chicana role models here that we can,
you know, talk to and say, you know, hey,
you know, this happened to me today. Or,
you know, I really, it's really strange
for me to be here and not be back home
where I see a lot of people who look like
myself, you know. And these are people
that you can talk to. too. Like Cecilia,
you know, she's, she's, I mean, I find it
incredible, she always has time to hear us
out. Always. Yeah, when, um, when I was a
freshman, like, I have a really nice story
about her, that, um, when I, well, I
didn't, for some dumb chance, I didn't get
to live in Zapata my freshman year. And
so, so, like, I had a lot of problems,
like, just trying to adapt and and trying
to decide what I was going to do with my
life. And I had this whole big problem
about deciding whether to be a doctor and
secure a good financial future for myself
and for my family or do what I really
wanted to do, which was to be a teacher.
And my freshman advisor recommended that I
go to her because he had heard so many
nice things about her that he thought she
could help me. And I remember going into
her office and just, like, crying my guts
out because I didn't know where I fit into
this university. And she had time. She sat
with me in her office and talked to me and
encouraged me to do what I felt was right,
to let my heart decide. And, I mean, for
the university not to recognize that she
is capable of keeping me here because I
was ready to leave. leave. And she
literally helped me to stay. And if it
wasn't for her, I mean, I wouldn't be
here. All of you are members of MECHA,
Movimiento Estudiantil Chicanos. That's
long history. What is the significance of
this new phase? And I'm referring
specifically to the various events that
started at UCLA, UC Santa Barbara,
Colorado, University of Colorado, and
Michigan State. Virginia too. Virginia
too. Can you talk about this in the
context of the overall resurgence of Mecha
and Chicano student activism? I think as
Mecha is the Chicano student movement, and
there's a long history of activism there,
dating back to the original planet and I
think that each of us has maintained that
goal of the betterment of La Raza. And our
Mecha is very strong and we support with
those founding Mechistas came up with in
terms of the Plan de Santa Barbara. and
it's gaining its and UCLA and UC Santa
Barbara and other universities Mecha
members and other organizations are taking
the leadership and moving the universities
to meet the demands the thing is playing
instrumental role
They got misquoted? They're going to print
tomorrow. Are they in support? Yeah. We're
rolling. So what happened? They're going
to print tomorrow. That sucks, man. I feel
bad for mine. Oh yeah. Sorry. Sorry. I was
going to ask you, I know earlier I talked
to your dad and I talked to your mom. I
know from them that it's been really hard
for them. I mean, they haven't been eating
as well. They're also, in a way, also in
the hunger strike. How do you feel?